Adversarial Eastmann process
===

Model of the TE (Tennessee Eastmann) challenge reactor
---

The Plant takes four inputs, A, C, D, E, and produces two outputs, G and H.

Primary reactions:

```
A(g) + C(g) + D(g) -> G(l)
A(g) + D(g) + E(g) -> H(l)

```
Byproduct reactions:

```
A(g) + E(g) -> F(l)
3D(g) -> 2F(l)
```

All are exothermic, reversible, and first-order
(rates follow an Arrhenius relation.)

Product flow is: 

```
a,d,e ->                                  c ->
    reactor -> condensor -> separator -> stripper -> product
          <- compressor <- purge <-
          <---------------------------------
```

The plant has unreliable sensors, and unreliable actuators. It may, from time to time, suffer DoS attacks. All of the above are configurable, and the process can run realtime or fast, verbose or not. The plant can also load an initial state at startup.

Program Loop
---

The program operates with temain as the driver, teprob as the process loop, and tecontrol generating control signals. Work in progress: adding a tesense.

High-level overview of teprob():

1. set IDVs
2. set wlk values
3. set Reactor ES, stream[3] properties (the latter by calling sub8)
4. load some state into Vessels
5. calculate XL from UCL
6. removed
7. removed
8. set VL
9. calculate Pressure of A,B,C
10. calculate Pressure of D,E,F,G,H
11. calculate XVs from PPs
12. calculate reaction rate coefficients
13. calculate change in reactant concentrations in Reactor
14. Set temps
15. set\_heat on streams()
16. calculate flows
17. calculate flms
18. calculate flow mass fracs
19. calculate flow concs
20. temp and heat conservation
21. underflow
22. XMEAS update
23. errors (based on GROUND TRUTH - change to XMEAS)
24. Separator Energy Balance?
25. VCVs, whatever they are 
26. update derivatives

The process represents internal state with 50 floating points, plus 24 booleans. The 50 states are:

```
0                     time
[1..4)                R.ucv
[4..9)                R.ucl
9                     R.et
[10..13)              S.ucv
[13..18)              S.ucl
18                    S.et
[19..27)              C.ucl
27                    C.et
[28..36)              V.ucv
36                    V.et
37                    twr
38                    tws
[39..50]              vpos
```

These elements of the model are inherent, all others should be derivable.

Project structure
---

Folder structure is as follows:

- src - source files for the reference Fortran implementation
- builds - old builds (we're unlikely to need) 
- utils - cleaning and seeding utilities for the reference Fortran implementation
- studies - experiment scripts for the reference Fortran implementation
- *.mod - autogenerated, ignore/autoremove
- teststates - contains known good/bad test states to test the control response
- env - contains the OpenAI gym environment implementation and example agents

Within src:

- constants.f95 - constants, as implied
- temain.f95 - driver and integrator
- teprob.f95 - process loop
- tewalk.f95 - random variations and attacks
- tesense.f95 - sensor loop
- tecontrol.f95 - control loop
- teout.f95 - formats output

- teloss.f95 sketches out loss measurement, but is not included.

Major changes occurred:

1. 080420 - first major refactor, adjustable disturbances, played with csv log format and then reverted.
2. 260521 - breaking change, new log format
3. xx1221 - Pythonised version with support for discrete inputs added

Building
---

Fortran:

Run make in the implementations directory to compile. The makefile compiles and datestamps the binary in debug and release mode, then updates the symlink (so invoking ./te always invokes the latest build), and test runs. Keeping older binaries is for use in case of regression, though this probably isn't that useful.

Python:

Consider using [https://python-poetry.org/](poetry) to manage the dependencies, as listed in pyproject.toml. If you want, the dependencies are also in requirements.txt, both in the Pythonised directory.

Logging and Output
---

The process logs to whatever directory it is invoked in. The state vector in textual format is represented in 23 chars, 15 point precision, so a simple state vector is 1.15 kB.

The full output is:

```
state.dat (50*23) 
idvs.dat (24*3)
xmeas.dat (41*23)
xmv.dat (12*23)
```

This represents 2.44 kB per timestep. (A binary representation would need only 632 B). Example:

```
0.000000000000000E+00  0.104049138900000E+02  0.436399601700000E+01  0.757005973700000E+01  0.423004243100000E+00  0.241551343700000E+02  0.294259764500000E+01  0.154377065500000E+03  0.159186596000000E+03  0.280852272300000E+01  0.637558119900000E+02  0.267402606600000E+02  0.463853243200000E+02  0.246452154300000E+00  0.152048440400000E+02  0.185226617200000E+01  0.524463945900000E+02  0.412039400800000E+02  0.569931776000000E+00  0.430605637600000E+00  0.799062007830000E-02  0.905603608900000E+00  0.160542582160000E-01  0.750975968700000E+00  0.885828559550000E-01  0.482772619300000E+02  0.393845902800000E+02  0.375529725700000E+00  0.107756269800000E+03  0.297725054600000E+02  0.883248113500000E+02  0.230392950700000E+02  0.628584879400000E+02  0.554631868800000E+01  0.119224477200000E+02  0.555544824300000E+01  0.921848976200000E+00  0.945992754900000E+02  0.772969835300000E+02  0.630526303900000E+02  0.539797067700000E+02  0.246435575500000E+02  0.613019214400000E+02  0.222100000000000E+02  0.400637467300000E+02  0.381003437000000E+02  0.465341558200000E+02  0.474457345600000E+02  0.411058128800000E+02  0.181134905500000E+02  0.500000000000000E+02
```

Environment
---

The Pythonised (aka OpenAI gym) environment is interactive, and depending on the branch (Discrete, Single Continuous, Continuous) takes different actions representing different red team capabilities.

For the **Discrete** variant:

Blue team actions

```
[0..12) => reset PLC 0-11 (TEproc will resort to open-loop for that PLC for one hour)
12 => restart entire plant (no production for 24 hours)
13 => continue (no action, no reward)
```

Red team actions

```
[0..41) => set xmv[i] to MAX
[41..50) => set xmeas[i-12] to 0.
50 => no action
```

For the **Single Continuous** variant:

Blue team actions:

```
adjust xmv[3] (A and C feed)
```

Red team actions:

```
adjust xmeas[7] (Reactor pressure)
```

For the **Continuous** variant:

Blue team actions:

```
[0..12) => adjust xmv[i]
```

Red team actions:

```
[0..9) => adjust setpoint[i]
```


Requirements
---

Most of the dependencies are specified in pyproject.toml.

Tested on x64 linux (kernels 5.13.19 and 6.3), with python-poetry (1.42), pandoc (^=3.0) and gcc-gfortran (^=13.0)

Further work
---

1. Better modularisation of the AI gym modification - test that environment can be loaded independently.
1b. Consider testing the whole as a poetry package - mostly, that means a better name.
1c. Split perturbations and action spaces and report into a separate module - that way that module differs between branches and not teprob.py 
2. Further continuous implementations - PPO, TRPO, etc.
3. Re-implement Fortran without the state vector - i.e. along OO- principles (`no-state-vec` branch)
4. Add raw memory output option to Fortran implementation, rather than futzing with parsing all the time 
5. (unlikely) replace the internal units with SI.
